Welcome!
This month’s program will help us show love
and respect in marriage.
Here are a few highlights.
Is your marriage strained
because your spouse opposes the truth?
We’ll see how Alexandru’s love and patience
promoted peace in his marriage
and ultimately moved his wife,
Dorina, to serve Jehovah.
We’ll learn how Claudius Johnson
dealt with changing circumstances.
And our new original song
reminds us of the joys of marriage
based on Bible principles.
This is JW Broadcasting® for March 2021!
Jehovah designed marriage
as a beautiful and rewarding relationship
between a husband and a wife.
When a husband and wife
fulfill their God-given roles
and they treat each other
with love and respect,
their marriage is a wonderful
and intimate friendship.
A marriage that has good patterns
shaped by Jehovah’s principles
looks like this well-balanced family circle.
But if a married couple over time
has set bad patterns
in how they deal with each other,
this is often the result.
Life is going to be a bit rough for them.
Let’s consider what Jehovah says
about the roles of husband and wife
and then discuss how love and respect
are real keys to a happy marriage.
So, what roles did Jehovah give
to the man and woman in marriage?
Well, Jehovah places the husband
as head of the family.
Ephesians 5:23 says:
“A husband is head of his wife.”
So that means that the husband
makes final decisions for the family.
And his decisions
will reflect his love for his wife,
his children,
and his understanding of their spiritual,
physical, and emotional needs.
At 1 Corinthians 11:3,
we get a sense, though, of how Jehovah feels
about the husband’s role.
And as we read this together,
I want you to imagine
Jehovah saying to husbands:
‘Yes, you’re head of the family.’
“But I want you to know that the head
“of every man is the Christ;
in turn, the head of a woman is the man.”
Sounds a lot like a father-in-law
speaking to the groom:
“You can marry my daughter,
but you’d better treat her good
because you’re responsible to me.”
Well, Jehovah is giving
a very clear message for husbands.
Jehovah will hold you accountable to him
for how you treat your wife.
It’s something for us husbands
to think about, isn’t it?
Well, what about the role of a wife?
Jehovah assigned wives
as a beloved partner to her husband.
And as partners,
they can discuss important family matters
and work together
to make their marriage a success.
Jehovah placed the woman
under the headship of the man,
and as such,
her role is to be in subjection to him.
At Ephesians 5:22,
it says: “Let wives be in subjection
to their husbands as to the Lord.”
Subjection
—said a certain way, it almost sounds bad:
“You have to be in subjection!”
But is the subjection of a Christian wife
to a Christian husband a bad thing?
No.
See, subjection as described in the Bible
is not about being subservient;
it’s about her role in the marriage.
You’re partners,
each with a beautiful role to fulfill.
We could illustrate it
with watching a couple ice skating.
As they move gracefully across the ice,
do you think to yourself,
‘How come they never
let her hold him over her head?’
Well, no.
You look at him; you look at her.
It’s obvious
who should hold who over their head.
Well, just as we admire and respect
a woman’s role as an ice skating partner,
a husband deeply loves and appreciates
his wife’s role as his partner
as they work gracefully together
to make their marriage a success.
Well, now that we’ve briefly reviewed
the roles for husbands and wives,
let’s read together
a key Scriptural principle
at Ephesians 5:33
that shows how Jehovah
wants husbands and wives
to fulfill their roles in marriage.
Ephesians 5:33:
“Each one of you must love his wife
as he does himself;
on the other hand, the wife should have
deep respect for her husband.”
Well, the obvious message in this scripture
is that husbands should love their wives
and wives should respect their husbands.
However, there’s another way
to look at this scripture
and learn something about husbands and wives.
Jehovah God is telling us
what each mate needs.
Men need respect, and women need love.
Now, this is not to say
that men don’t need love
and women don’t need to be respected.
However, it does mean that men
tend to emphasize respect and status
and women often emphasize
intimacy, connection, and love.
This perfect principle
can help us to understand
why our husband or wife
may act or feel a certain way.
Now, this difference in emphasis
affects many areas of married life.
Let’s consider three examples
of how this powerful Scriptural principle
of love and respect
can give us insight
into how a husband and wife
talk to each other,
how they solve problems,
and how they act in the company of others.
Let’s consider our first example:
how they talk to each other.
Now, since a wife’s emphasis
is on being loved,
her conversations often stress friendship
and connection when she talks to her husband.
She’s eager to share
the details of her life with him
and in this way become closer to him.
She wants him, in turn, to share with her
the details of his day and life.
Husbands, your wife
feels loved when you learn
to communicate with her
in a way that tells her
you truly care about her.
She places great emphasis
on conversation and sharing her life with you
and likewise you sharing your life with her.
For example, a wife
tells her husband about something
that happened to her that day.
He grows impatient
with the story and interrupts
or changes the subject
or offers a quick solution.
How does she feel?
‘Why can’t he listen to the whole story?
Has he lost interest in me?’
It’s important that husbands give their wives
their full attention as they speak.
After a long day at work,
his mind may be focused on events
that happened to him that day.
And he may without realizing it
feel that the events
or conversation of his wife
aren’t on important subjects.
So he may be inclined
to play down the events in her life
as unimportant, or trivial,
while events he talks
about are substantial and important
because they happened to him.
Well, such a feeling over time
can truly discourage a wife.
A husband’s disinterest in her stories
and events of her life
feels a lot like disinterest in her.
The advice of Proverbs 20:5
is good for husbands.
It says: “The thoughts of a man’s
[or we could say in this case, woman’s] heart
“are like deep waters,
but the discerning man draws them out.”
That’s great advice for husbands.
Husbands, when you draw
your wife out,
let her speak from her heart.
That’s an indication of great love
and affection for your dear wife.
Men, on the other hand,
often view conversation differently.
A husband comes home,
and his wife asks, “How was your day?”
He says: “It was OK.
Nothing special.”
But later that night
when they’re with a group of friends,
he tells a story about what happened at work.
And she wonders,
‘Well, why didn’t he tell me that
when I asked about his day?’
Well, since a man’s emphasis is on respect,
they often use conversation
to establish respect and status with others.
A husband may feel
that his wife already respects him,
so there’s no need to tell her the story.
Wives, you can encourage your husband
to share his life with you
by being interested
in his work and activities.
If you tell him, “Don’t talk to me
about all that work stuff with me,” he won’t
and you’ll cut yourself off
from a part of his life.
Show him that you’re proud
of what he does to support the family.
Be interested in what happened to him,
how he feels about things,
or challenges that he overcame.
While you may not find
his work all that interesting,
remember, it is important to him.
Let’s consider our second example:
how they solve problems.
Now I want you to imagine a husband and wife.
They’re in a car,
they’re looking for an address,
and they’re lost.
And the wife suggests
that they ask someone for directions.
She’s thinking, ‘Why won’t he ask?’
He’s thinking,
‘Why can’t she just let me find it?’
You see,
since the man’s emphasis is on respect,
he’s trying to avoid
looking lost to a stranger.
The act of asking someone else for directions
may make him feel
like he’s in a lower position.
Finding their way is a challenge to him,
and he wants to show his wife
that he can find it on his own.
For the woman,
such an idea may not come to mind.
She may view it as a simple interchange
between them and a stranger.
They get help and directions,
and they find out where they’re going.
At 1 Corinthians 7:33,
Jehovah tells us:
“But the married man is anxious . . . ,
how he may gain the approval of his wife.”
Wives, your husband is anxious
to have your approval and respect.
But on balance, husbands have to be careful
that an emphasis on respect
doesn’t become unreasonable.
It won’t hurt us
to ask for directions or help at times.
On the other hand, a wife needs to be careful
that she doesn’t show impatience
by her words or tone
as her husband
works his way through a problem.
A wife who clearly understands
her husband’s desire
to solve problems for the family
will understand his actions
and will do her part to support him,
even in the little things around the home.
Now, this support in the little areas of life
builds his confidence in her support
and can be a major factor
in whether a husband
takes the lead in larger matters.
Our third and final example:
how they act in front of others.
Have you ever seen a couple
where one of them is telling a story
and the other
is constantly correcting the details?
or the husband
is trying to give some direction
and the wife corrects
or challenges the direction?
or the husband is telling others
some unflattering story
that hurts his wife’s feelings?
How can Ephesians 5:33
help a wife in these situations?
Well, since a husband’s emphasis
is on respect,
he’ll be much more sensitive
to comments his wife may make
in front of others.
It can hurt a husband deeply
when his wife openly challenges him
in front of others.
Proverbs 31:12
has this advice for wives:
“She rewards him with good, not bad,
all the days of her life.”
So when in public or when others are around
—even close family and children—
try not to openly disagree
with him, correct him,
or attempt to take over what he’s doing.
How you speak to your husband
in front of others
is a great way
to show your deep respect for him.
It also builds respect for him in others,
including any children in the family.
Well, how can Ephesians 5:33
help a husband act in front of others?
Well, when in public,
husbands will want to act
like the husband at Proverbs 31:28.
It says: “Her husband
rises up and praises her.”
It’s common today for husbands to make fun of
or even say demeaning things
about their wives.
But since a wife places so much emphasis
on connection and friendship,
she can really be hurt
when demeaning remarks are said
to get a laugh; it makes her feel awful.
Husbands, your wife
considers you her best friend,
the one she shares everything with.
If you break that trust,
she feels unloved and hurt.
Now, the best time
to bring matters to each other’s attention
is when you’re in private or, if needed,
when you can talk in such a way
that others cannot hear what’s being said.
In this way, a wife
shows deep respect for her husband
and the husband shows his love for his wife.
So in review,
we’ve considered just three situations
that the principle of love and respect
can help us to have a successful marriage:
how a husband and wife talk to each other,
how they solve problems,
and how they act in the company of others.
A good marriage is hard work.
How is your marriage?
Would you say
that you’ve developed good patterns
or bad patterns in dealing with each other?
When was the last time you talked as a couple
about love and respect for each other?
Jehovah’s perfect advice at Ephesians 5:33
can help the marriage
of two imperfect people.
In just a few words in this verse,
Jehovah is sharing with us a key principle
of how he designed marriage.
He’s telling us
what each needs and places emphasis on.
Husbands put emphasis on being respected,
and wives put emphasis on being loved.
And this principle forms a key part
of the divine pattern for marriage.
If you want your marriage
to operate as Jehovah designed,
then work hard to apply his perfect principle
of love and respect in your marriage.
Why can we be confident
that Bible principles
for husbands and wives work?
Because they’ve worked
for Jehovah’s people in the past.
In the following dramatization,
notice what wives and husbands
can learn from the example of Sarah.
Pioneering where the need is greater
wasn’t easy.
After a long day in service,
I had a part to work on.
Thankfully, Jess took care of everything,
so I could focus on my part.
She’s the best!
Poor thing, she was exhausted.
Good thing we were turning in early.
William and I couldn’t agree on much lately.
We couldn’t afford this!
There had to be something cheaper,
but he wouldn’t listen.
Sometimes, I feel that my husband
doesn’t make the best decisions.
I just wish he’d value my suggestions.
Frankly, I’ve given up trying.
“Just as Sarah obeyed Abraham,
calling him lord.”
Hebrews chapter 11 and Isaiah chapter 51
also cite Sarah as a fine example
for Christian wives.
But Christian husbands
can also learn much
from carefully examining . . .
Hmm.
Sarah’s example: for me.
“Sarah was willing to move to parts unknown
A life fraught with danger and hardship.”
She unselfishly supported Abraham
no matter what
—just like my Jessica.
She does without, never complains
—what a gem!
I can do better letting her know
just how precious she is to me.
Sarah submissively obeyed her husband,
but she also spoke up.
She loved her son,
and she knew what was at stake
—God’s promises through Isaac.
Even though she knew it would upset Abraham,
she spoke up.
She must have thought carefully
before speaking to him.
After all, she called him “lord.”
Jehovah blessed her
for her loyal support of Abraham,
even reminding him to listen to her.
I knew I couldn’t expect Jehovah
to whisper in my husband’s ear.
But did my speech show respect like Sarah’s?
I needed to tell him how I felt,
but I needed to do it the right way.
That night we spoke,
and little by little
things started to improve.
Imitating Sarah really worked.
In our next video,
we’ll get to know Claudius Johnson.
Even though his wife died over 20 years ago,
I think you’ll see from his interview
that his spiritual qualities
and focus on Kingdom interests
enhanced his over four decades of marriage.
Prayer is an important thing.
With everything I do,
I always go to Jehovah in prayer
and ask for his guidance.
I was born on the 26th of March, 1923
in Panama.
I was baptized in August 1946
in Cleveland, Ohio.
I started pioneering
in January of 1947.
There are a couple of scriptures
that have been most influential in my life.
One is Psalm 55:22,
which says:
“Throw your burden on Jehovah,
“and he will sustain you.
Never will he allow
the righteous one to fall.”
One of the most trying experiences of my life
was facing the Selective Service Board.
I registered as was required by law,
and I received the classification of 1-A
—fit for military service.
I then spoke
with the Society’s Legal Department,
and I was instructed to appeal the decision
because I was a regular pioneer.
I had to go to the draft board,
and there I was severely questioned.
One of the problems they had
was that I had a part-time job,
and they felt that
that interfered with my being classified
as a full-time minister.
However, because I was conducting
about 12 Bible studies at that time,
I took copies
of all those records
and presented them to the board.
The chairman said to me,
“Are you saying that if we were
“to talk to all of these people,
they would tell us
that you are conducting Bible studies
with them every week?”
And I said, “Yes, Sir.”
While they are deliberating,
I am praying hard, “Jehovah, help them
to make a proper decision.”
In a few days’ time,
the classification card came as 4-D.
I was classified as a Religious Minister,
and I lifted my thoughts to Jehovah and said,
“Thank you, Jehovah, very much!”
When I was in the circuit work in Cuba,
I had a few encounters with soldiers.
It’s difficult to understand
the tense atmosphere
that existed back in those days
and the freedom that those rebels had
with shooting people—even Batista’s people.
They didn’t give it a second thought.
I had just got through
serving a congregation in the hills,
and we took the local bus
that ran around that area.
And on the highway,
two soldiers stopped the bus
and ordered all the men to get off.
They started looking
at each of us one by one,
sending everybody back on the bus.
They looked at me and said:
“You! Stay there!”
They pointed a rifle at me
and said, “Who are you?”
And I explained myself,
but they kept pointing the rifle.
One of the soldiers said
to the driver, “Take off!”
That’s when you pray hard,
and you remember the scripture
at Proverbs 29:25:
“Trembling at men is a snare,
but the one trusting in Jehovah
will be protected.”
The driver said: “No!
He’s a circuit overseer!
He rides with me all the time.”
And he really defended me
and made me believe
that Jehovah’s angels intervened.
And that’s why I say
that I am a slave to prayer.
It’s the most important thing in my life.
When I came back to the United States,
I was being used
by the Service Department
in the full-time work.
A few years later,
I had to give up the full-time work
and take care of my family.
The adjustment I had to make
to be a family man was hard
because most of my life
was occupied in full-time service.
But I had to leave matters
in Jehovah’s hands.
We started the prison ministry
around May of 1974.
It gives you a measure of satisfaction
in seeing how the Bible
has a very strong influence
on individuals
—to see criminals
turn their life completely around.
The Bible changes lives,
and that’s why pioneering
has always been in my heart.
And so after my wife died,
I felt that the proper thing to do
was to get back into the full-time service.
As a result of that,
I started pioneering again in 1998.
Jehovah God has been good to me,
and at my age of 96,
I thank Jehovah every day
for the health and strength
that he permits me to enjoy
—and I keep on going.
Did you notice that it was prayer
that helped Brother Johnson and his family
to face a variety of changing circumstances?
He continues to display the same spirit
at nearly 98 years of age.
Are you married to someone
who doesn’t serve Jehovah
or is even opposed to the truth?
You’ll appreciate the experience
of Alexandru and Dorina Văcar.
I started to study the Bible in 1993.
At that time, I was 43 years old.
I was married for 19 years,
and I had two children.
At that time, I didn’t know if I would become
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses or not.
But I accepted a Bible study.
At my husband’s request, I started
studying the Bible at the same time,
but I only studied for about a year.
Then I decided, ‘I’m going to stop.’
I asked him to stop studying too.
I told him: “Let’s stop studying.
“This is not for us.
We don’t understand it.”
But in a very diplomatic and calm way,
he said he would continue.
When I realized
he would continue studying, I said to myself:
‘Well, all right then.
‘Just you wait and see.
‘If you really want to continue,
I will somehow make you stop studying
(in a subtle way), but I will do it.’
Just seeing him get ready to go
in field service annoyed me so much.
I started burying him with household chores,
asking him to help me
more and more around the house.
But calmly and gently every time,
he would ask me
if he could prepare for meetings.
And one time when he asked me
if he could prepare for the meeting,
yet again I got irritated and said:
“You’re not going to prepare now.
We’re going to clean
the whole apartment thoroughly.”
After we were finally finished at midnight,
he asked me very calmly
if there was anything else
he could help me with.
It was not easy for him
to deal with my efforts
to force him to stop studying.
And after he got baptized,
I tried even harder.
But he never retaliated;
he stayed calm and endured it.
In this period, I was trying
to understand her reactions.
But it wasn’t easy for me.
Hearing her criticisms, those harsh replies,
I thought sometimes:
‘I think I’ll just give up.
It makes no sense to go on like this.’
I said to the brother who was studying
with me about this,
“I want to stop.”
And he encouraged me.
He said: “No, no, no, don’t stop.
“Don’t quit.
“Continue, continue.
Probably your wife will follow you.”
These conversations always encouraged me,
and when we finished our study,
I would see things
from a different perspective.
I always loved my wife,
and I wanted her to be by my side.
During this period, he often told me
how much he loved me
—many times, yes, very often.
And sometimes he would ask me
if I loved him too.
There were times when I would answer him,
and there were times
when I just smiled and said nothing.
And I even thought, ‘Hey, this guy
really cares about me.’
I was impressed by his kindness.
I was very impressed.
Many times, I was musing:
‘Well, as a man, he could hit me.
He could be demanding,
“You will sit down,”’ you know.
But no, he never did that.
He never raised his voice,
never spoke a mean word
—never.
When she saw that I did not retaliate
—as in I would not reply harshly
and I would not talk badly to her—
then eventually
she would calm down.
In his calm and mild way,
he began inviting me to the meetings.
He kept on inviting me,
and sometimes I was willing to accept.
Slowly, I started to attend the meetings.
I was happy.
I was very happy when she said
she wanted to resume her study.
In August 2006,
I started studying the Bible again.
And in March 2007,
I became an unbaptized publisher.
And in July 2007, I decided to get baptized.
I served in the Baptism Department,
and I had the privilege
to personally baptize my dear wife.
First Corinthians 13:4 says
that “love is patient and kind.”
Patience means,
first of all, being patient for months,
years, or maybe even decades.
Never give up.
Never consider someone as a lost cause.
Even though Alexandru and Dorina’s marriage
was far from ideal for a long time,
Alexandru didn’t lose his patience.
He was calm and loving.
That promoted peace, and eventually
it moved Dorina to embrace the truth.
If you have an unbelieving mate,
remember Alexandru’s example
and, as he said, “Never give up.”
Ecclesiastes 4:12
speaks of “a threefold cord”
that “cannot quickly be torn apart.”
That’s often applied to Christian marriage.
But what does that “threefold cord” mean,
and how does it make a marriage successful?
We’ll learn the answers in our next segment.
It was summertime, and a group
of brothers and sisters made arrangements
during vacation time to go to the beach.
And so during that time,
heading to the beach is where I met her.
I had met her sisters, but I had not met her.
My grandparents and my aunt
were a very important part
in raising me and my sisters.
They learned the truth first, in Ecuador.
We always lived close by.
I always went to visit them.
And they helped my parents
in guiding me into the truth.
The first three or four years of our marriage,
we were about an hour and a half away from our family.
That was really hard on me
because I’m close to my sisters.
So it was kind of hard being so far—
To me that was really far.
I knew early on
that one of the most important things
that I needed in a mate
is someone who loves Jehovah.
And they always say—
I remember my parents
(and at the meetings) always said,
“Find someone
who loves Jehovah more than they love you.”
And it’s easy to say that,
but then you find someone
and you realize that she
loves Jehovah more than she loves you.
She has demonstrated it
through our entire marriage.
When it comes to Jehovah, he’s first.
I think that is the key
to a successful marriage.
I think the biggest challenge
we went through in our marriage
was our first year in the circuit work.
It was hard enough
moving 3,000 miles away from everyone
and starting a new type of life.
Two months later, my grandfather dies;
six months right after that, my mother dies.
So after her mom died, my mom passed away.
It was one right after the other.
That was a difficult time for us
—all the pain and suffering
from losing our moms and loved ones.
Many times we felt
that we could not continue.
It was overwhelming.
The period of time
was eight months
and ten days between the death
of Mimi’s mom and my mom.
The threefold cord is a routine
in which Jehovah is included
in the marriage
—from reading the Bible together,
to going in the ministry together,
to doing everyday things together.
And as you do this,
Jehovah is present in your marriage.
We always think that it’s our Bible reading.
Actually, we don’t think—we realize
that our Bible reading
is very important for us.
We pick a book;
we start reading it, and we know
that is what keeps us together.
We were both already pioneering
before we got married.
And when we got married,
we just figured out a way
to continue pioneering together
to make sure
to start our spiritual careers together.
So we have to always depend on Jehovah,
which is the best Person to always depend on.
We spent a lot of time by ourselves,
driving from city to city
and from state to state.
We had plenty of time to reflect, to talk,
and to draw close to each other
—to not only rely on Jehovah
but also to be closer between us
and to spend more time
talking about the visits,
talking about the friends,
and talking about how we feel.
I think that at the end
it was the toughest assignment,
but it was the most rewarding
of all the assignments we had had
in all these years in the traveling work.
Because it’s the three of us
and Jehovah’s an equal part of our marriage,
it doesn’t matter what we go through
—whether it’s Peter or I
that’s having a little bit of a struggle—
because Jehovah is there.
He’s going to keep us united and strong.
And also, it’s not just
in the things we do while we worship.
Yes, we worship together,
but it’s also all the other things
that we do Jehovah’s way.
We’re best friends,
and we enjoy spending time together
outside of service and the meetings.
We like doing fun things outside.
We like the outdoors.
When we’re facing a difficult challenge,
we will go to Jehovah in prayer together
and specifically pray,
“Jehovah, help us with this challenge.”
Our assignments have helped us
to always be with each other
because we have the same goals in mind.
We’re working together
for the same purpose.
So the same schedule
—spiritual schedule—
has really helped us to go through
these challenging periods in our life.
Knowing that Jehovah is our Creator,
the Sovereign Being
—he’s the one who should tell us what to do.
And there is an arrangement,
and when you follow his arrangement,
there’s happiness; there’s success.
We’re in an imperfect world,
but his arrangement works,
and we have felt it.
When husbands and wives
are united with Jehovah,
their marriage is as strong
as that threefold cord.
The Bible uses another term
to describe the unity of husband and wife:
“They . . . become one flesh.”
This was the topic
of a Morning Worship program
presented by Brother Robert Ciranko.
Genesis 2:24 says of a man and a woman
who marry that they are
to “become one flesh.”
Now, that raises some questions:
Whose words are those?
What do they mean?
How can we show that we believe them?
And is there a good example
in the Bible of a couple who did?
Let’s start with looking at the context.
If you’d open your Bibles,
please, to Genesis chapter 2,
and we’ll start with verse 18—Genesis 2.
It reports: “Then Jehovah God said:
“‘It is not good for the man
to continue to be alone.
I am going to make a helper for him,
as a complement of him.’”
Continuing in verse 21:
“So Jehovah God caused the man to fall
into a deep sleep, and while he was sleeping,
“he took one of his ribs
and then closed up the flesh over its place.
“And Jehovah God built the rib
that he had taken from the man into a woman,
“and he brought her to the man.
“Then the man said:
“‘This is at last bone of my bones
and flesh of my flesh.
“This one will be called Woman,
because from man she was taken.’
“That is why a man will leave
his father and his mother
and he will stick to his wife,
and they will become one flesh.”
So our first question is,
Whose words are these?
Adam’s?
No.
The only words attributed to Adam
are when he waxed poetic in verse 23.
And you can see that from the opening
and closing quotation marks in that verse.
Well, then it must have been
Moses’ words because,
after all,
he wrote the Bible book of Genesis.
No.
He was not present
at the time of the first marriage.
He did not start writing
until some 2,500 years later,
and even then,
he was writing what he was inspired to write.
Three Bible writers
use this expression, “one flesh”
—Matthew, Mark, and Paul.
And it’s Matthew who gives us
the clue as to whose words they are.
So let’s turn to Matthew chapter 19,
Matthew 19
beginning with verse 4.
And here Matthew writes and quotes Jesus;
it says: “In reply he [Jesus] said:
“‘Have you not read
that the one who created them
“‘from the beginning made
them male and female and said:
“‘“For this reason a man
will leave his father and his mother
“‘and will stick to his wife,
and the two will be one flesh”?
“‘So that they are no longer two,
but one flesh.
Therefore, what God has yoked together,
let no man put apart.’”
So Matthew makes it clear
that Jehovah said those words.
And shouldn’t that elevate in everyone’s mind
the sanctity of the marital union?
As Jesus said, ‘God created male and female’
—two complementary genders—
and he ‘yoked them together
in marriage as one flesh.’
Now, it’s interesting what
The Bible Exposition Commentary
says about this:
“God established marriage,
“and therefore only God
can control its character . . .
“It is a union between one man and one woman.
“God did not create two men and one woman,
“two women and one man,
two men, or two women.
“‘Group marriages,’ ‘gay marriages,’
“and other variations
are contrary to the will of God,
no matter what
some psychologists and jurists may say.”
“No court of law can change
what God has established.”
And those are comments we can agree with.
Now, our second question is, What do these
words mean: “They will become one flesh”?
Well, of course, the one-flesh relationship
certainly involves sexual union,
but it goes beyond that
because it includes a husband and wife
who have achieved mental,
emotional, and spiritual harmony.
They are to have a oneness
in their purpose and desires.
As Bible translator William Barclay
renders it at Matthew 19:5:
“The husband
will be joined inseparably to his wife.”
So in marriage, a man and a woman
are to become each other’s
closest partner in life.
Being “one flesh” means that they must always
be thinking more
of each other than of themselves,
that they must consider
each other in everything they do.
So when single people marry,
they need to shift
their thinking from mine to ours,
from me to we.
And so they must stop being single at heart
and come to be married at heart,
not just on paper.
Now, our third question is,
How can we show
that we believe these words?
Well, sad to say, many people these days
take a very casual attitude toward marriage,
and when the relationship becomes strained,
they just give up and walk out on their mate.
But that is not the Christian way.
Marriage is to be a lifelong relationship.
Just a few verses later on at Matthew 19:9,
Jesus taught that the only Scriptural ground
for dissolving marriage
is when an innocent mate
chooses not to forgive an adulterous partner.
And that is because sexual relations
outside the marriage bond
are a gross perversion
of the one-flesh union.
Now, let’s read Paul’s words about this
at 1 Corinthians chapter 6
—1 Corinthians 6:16;
he said: “Do you not know
that anyone who is joined to a prostitute
“is one body with her?
For ‘the two,’ says he,
‘will be one flesh.’”
So the adulterer pulls away
from his marriage mate
and makes himself
one flesh with a third person.
That, then,
is the only Scriptural basis for divorce.
But divorce is a very painful experience.
As one sociologist put it,
“Divorce is drastic surgery.”
To sever the one-flesh bond
between husband and wife
would be like sawing oneself asunder.
What, though, if no adultery
has been committed?
What if, for some reason,
two people who are married to each other
just don’t like each other any longer?
Divorce is not an option.
Instead, they need to remind themselves
of what attracted them to each other
and work at rekindling those feelings,
while at the same time
looking to Jehovah for help
in not only strengthening their marriage
but also their spirituality.
Our fourth question is,
What Scriptural example
is there of a married couple
who believed this one-flesh idea?
Turn to Romans 16:3, please,
Romans 16:3; here Paul writes:
“Give my greetings
to Prisca [or Priscilla] and Aquila,
my fellow workers in Christ Jesus.”
So, yes, Aquila and Priscilla
—what a model of a close and united couple
living up to what Jehovah meant
when he said that a husband or wife
should become one flesh!
And Paul, who worked closely with them,
could not think of that dear brother
without recalling
the faithful cooperation of his wife.
So it’s a fine example
for Christian couples today.
And in every one
of the six references to this couple
in the Christian Greek Scriptures,
we find them working together,
cooperating without competition or strife.
And never is one mentioned without the other.
They constantly worked together
in their home,
in their secular work, in the ministry.
And surely it was the time
spent together in Christian activities
that kept their marriage
on a high spiritual plane,
working side by side
to further the Kingdom work.
Now, you and your marriage mate may be apart
for much of the day
due to different work and responsibilities.
But can you find time each day
to eat meals together,
to do household chores together,
to take walks together,
to be together to get caught up
on what has gone on
in your lives during the day?
Aquila and Priscilla proved that being united
in activities related to true worship
can keep a couple’s thinking
and goals aligned,
and that does strengthen a marriage.
For example, studying together,
participating
in congregation meetings together,
sharing in the ministry together,
praying together,
in doing all of that,
a person’s interests, priorities, and habits
will harmonize with those
of one’s spouse until,
like Aquila and Priscilla,
we increasingly think, feel,
and act as one flesh.
So now we know who said the words.
It was Jehovah.
We understand what they mean
—achieving harmony
in one’s relationship with one’s mate.
And we can certainly prove
that we believe these words
by staying close to our mate
and maintaining our marriage bond.
And then we have that excellent example
of Aquila and Priscilla to abide by.
“One flesh,” “a threefold cord”
—when a husband and wife
apply Bible principles,
their marriage endures and is successful.
And we’ll see that in our new music video.
You’re the one,
The only one for me.
You’re my love,
My one and only.
Your qualities, your faith—
They bring me such delight.
And with God’s help,
I know our future’s bright.
It fills my heart with love
To know you stand by me.
I feel your deep respect;
I know you’re proud of me.
Together we can be strong;
Together’s where we belong.
Jehovah helps us stay more in love each day—
My only one.
You’re the one for me;
You listen to my thoughts.
And as a team,
We work hard for our God.
Yes, in my heart I feel
You cherish me, my love.
You’ll always be the one—
The one I’m so proud of.
Together we can be strong;
Together’s where we belong.
Jehovah helps us stay more in love each day—
My only one.
Together we can be strong;
Together’s where we belong.
Jehovah helps us stay more in love each day—
My only one,
My love.
The theme of this month’s program was
“Show Love and Respect in Your Marriage.”
Sarah’s example shows wives
how to give their husbands suggestions
and husbands how to show
appreciation for their wives.
We learned the importance of prayer
when we face changing circumstances.
And Alexandru’s love and patience
helped his wife serve Jehovah.
By integrating Jehovah into their marriage,
couples can overcome challenges
and serve Jehovah together.
Now let’s enjoy our video postcard.
This month we visit
our brothers and sisters in Guyana.
This country of more than 750,000 people
is in the northeastern corner
of South America.
This is a land of lush rain forests,
sugarcane plantations, and open grasslands.
Temperatures and humidity are high,
and the rainfall is heavy.
In fact, Guyana means “land of water.”
These brothers
are with the congregation in Charity,
a part of Guyana known
for extensive preaching done along the river.
More than half
of Guyana’s population is rural,
and most people live in villages
in the coastal region.
This is Baramita,
a Carib-language-speaking community
known for gold mining.
The congregation’s 119 publishers
conduct an average
of 228 Bible studies every month.
Baramita is also home
to a remote translation office.
Many people live scattered
throughout the surrounding dense jungle.
And reaching them
requires hours and hours of walking.
Because the rainy season
is over half of the year,
travel can be very difficult.
But our brothers and sisters
—they’re not deterred by the terrain.
Now, these are typical dwellings
of the Carib community in Baramita.
And, our brothers
—they preach to everyone they encounter,
from cassava farmers to gold miners.
Our brothers and sisters
in the Baramita Congregation
send you their warm love and greetings.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.